README.md, before:

# QUDTLib: Java Unit Conversion Library based on QUDT

Provides unit conversion and related functionality for Java.

Makes all conversions and related functionality defined by the excellent [QUDT ontology](https://qudt.org) available in a
**self-contained jar**  with **no external dependencies**. The jar containing all dependencies is **~400kB large**.

The library offers
* 1745 units, such as second, Fahrenheit, or light year
* 881 quantityKinds, such as width, pressure ratio or currency
* 29 prefixes, such as mega, kibi, or atto

...all of which the library converts if possible.

## Usage

The module clients will want to use is `io.github.qudtlib:qudtlib`. The other modules are merely needed to generate that one from the latest [QUDT release zip](https://github.com/qudt/qudt-public-repo/tags).

Maven dependency:

```
<dependency>
	<groupId>io.github.qudtlib</groupId>
	<artifactId>qudtlib</artifactId>
	<version>${project.version}</version> <!-- remember to use the latest version -->
</dependency>
```

## API

`io.github.qudtlib.Qudt` is your friend. All functionality is accessed through static methods of that class.
You can explore the API from that starting point.

The main Model classes are:
* `Unit`: encapsulates IRI, label, [dimension vector](https://github.com/qudt/qudt-public-repo/wiki/User-Guide-for-QUDT#3-introducing-dimension-vectors-for-si-units), [multiplier/offset](https://github.com/qudt/qudt-public-repo/wiki/User-Guide-for-QUDT#4-conversion-multipliers-in-qudt), factor units (if any). Descriptions are omitted (create an issue if you want them.)
* `QuantityKind`: IRI, label, applicable units, broader quantity kinds
* `QuantityValue`: value and unit. Values are always `BigDecimal` (using `MathContext.DECIMAL128`) and there are no convenience methods allowing you
to provide other numeric types. This is intentiaonal so as not to mask any conversion problems. You'll be fine. (If you need a different `MathContext`, make an issue)

All units, quantityKinds and prefixes are avalable as constants:
* `Qudt.Units`: all units, such as `Qudt.Units.KiloM__PER__SEC`
* `Qudt.QuantityKinds:`: all quantityKinds, such as `Qudt.QuantityKinds.BloodGlucoseLevel`
* `Qudt.Prefixes`: all prefixes, such as `Qudt.Prefixes.Atto`

The functionality comprises:
* `Qudt.convert(...)`: Convert a value
* `Qudt.scaledUnit(...)`: Scale a unit (e.g., make `KiloM` from `M` and `kilo`)
* `Qudt.unscaledUnit(..)`: Unscale a unit:
* `Qudt.unit(...)`: Get Unit by IRI
* `Qudt.quantityKind(...)`: Get QuantityKind by IRI
* `Qudt.unitFromLocalName(...)`: Get Unit by local name (i.e., last part of IRI)
* `Qudt.quantityKindFromLocalName(...)`: Get QuantityKind by local name (i.e., last part of IRI)
* `Qudt.derivedUnitsFrom...(...)`: Get Units by 'factor units', e.g. find `N` for factors  `m, kg, and s^-2`. Different matching modes available for broader or narrower matching.
* `Qudt.unitFromLabel(...)`: Get Unit by label

## Examples

(see also module qudtlib-example)

### Unit conversion

Converting 38.5° Celsius into Fahrenheit:

```java
Qudt.convert(new BigDecimal("38.5"), Qudt.Units.DEG_C, Qudt.Units.DEG_F));
-->
101.3003929999999551224000000000036unit:DEG_F
```

### Find unit by factor units

Finding unit for factors: m, kg, and s^-2:

```java
Set<Unit> myUnits =
          Qudt.derivedUnitFromUnitExponentPairs(
                        Qudt.Units.M, 1,
                        Qudt.Units.KiloGM, 1,
                        Qudt.Units.SEC, -2);
-->
N
```

### Find factor units of a derived unit:

Finding factors of unit N:

```java
List<FactorUnit> myFactorUnits = Qudt.Units.N.getFactorUnits();
-->
FU{m^1}
FU{kg^1}
FU{s^-2}
```

### Scale Conversion

Converting 1N into kN:

```java
QuantityValue quantityValue = new QuantityValue(new BigDecimal("1"), Qudt.Units.N);
QuantityValue converted = Qudt.convert(quantityValue, Qudt.Units.KiloN);
-->
0.001kN
```

### List convertible units

Which units can we convert to from L?

```java
Unit fromUnit = Qudt.Units.L;
for (Unit unit : Qudt.allUnits()) {
     if (Qudt.isConvertible(fromUnit, unit)) {
          System.out.println("  " + unit + " (" + unit.getIri() + ")");
     }
}
-->
unit:GT (http://qudt.org/vocab/unit/GT)
tsp (http://qudt.org/vocab/unit/TSP)
cup (http://qudt.org/vocab/unit/CUP)
unit:YD3 (http://qudt.org/vocab/unit/YD3)
RT (http://qudt.org/vocab/unit/RT)
unit:M3 (http://qudt.org/vocab/unit/M3)
fL (http://qudt.org/vocab/unit/FemtoL)
dry_pt (http://qudt.org/vocab/unit/PINT_US_DRY)
daL (http://qudt.org/vocab/unit/DecaL)
pL (http://qudt.org/vocab/unit/PicoL)
unit:CUP_US (http://qudt.org/vocab/unit/CUP_US)
hL (http://qudt.org/vocab/unit/HectoL)
ML (http://qudt.org/vocab/unit/MegaL)
unit:BBL_US (http://qudt.org/vocab/unit/BBL_US)
st (http://qudt.org/vocab/unit/STR)
oz (http://qudt.org/vocab/unit/OZ_VOL_US)
unit:OZ_VOL_UK (http://qudt.org/vocab/unit/OZ_VOL_UK)
dL (http://qudt.org/vocab/unit/DeciL)
dry_gal (http://qudt.org/vocab/unit/GAL_US_DRY)
tbsp (http://qudt.org/vocab/unit/TBSP)
unit:Standard (http://qudt.org/vocab/unit/Standard)
nL (http://qudt.org/vocab/unit/NanoL)
unit:MilliM3 (http://qudt.org/vocab/unit/MilliM3)
gal (http://qudt.org/vocab/unit/GAL_IMP)
qt (http://qudt.org/vocab/unit/QT_US)
unit:PlanckVolume (http://qudt.org/vocab/unit/PlanckVolume)
pk (http://qudt.org/vocab/unit/PK_US_DRY)
unit:PK_UK (http://qudt.org/vocab/unit/PK_UK)
mL (http://qudt.org/vocab/unit/MilliL)
μL (http://qudt.org/vocab/unit/MicroL)
unit:DeciM3 (http://qudt.org/vocab/unit/DeciM3)
pt (http://qudt.org/vocab/unit/PINT_US)
unit:PINT_UK (http://qudt.org/vocab/unit/PINT_UK)
Bf (http://qudt.org/vocab/unit/FBM)
pi (http://qudt.org/vocab/unit/PINT)
unit:GAL_UK (http://qudt.org/vocab/unit/GAL_UK)
gal (http://qudt.org/vocab/unit/GAL_US)
bbl (http://qudt.org/vocab/unit/BBL)
unit:MicroM3 (http://qudt.org/vocab/unit/MicroM3)
ac-ft (http://qudt.org/vocab/unit/AC-FT)
unit:FT3 (http://qudt.org/vocab/unit/FT3)
unit:QT_UK (http://qudt.org/vocab/unit/QT_UK)
unit:CentiM3 (http://qudt.org/vocab/unit/CentiM3)
bui (http://qudt.org/vocab/unit/BU_UK)
bua (http://qudt.org/vocab/unit/BU_US)
unit:MI3 (http://qudt.org/vocab/unit/MI3)
unit:BBL_US_DRY (http://qudt.org/vocab/unit/BBL_US_DRY)
kL (http://qudt.org/vocab/unit/KiloL)
unit:BBL_UK_PET (http://qudt.org/vocab/unit/BBL_UK_PET)
unit:IN3 (http://qudt.org/vocab/unit/IN3)
dry_qt (http://qudt.org/vocab/unit/QT_US_DRY)
L (http://qudt.org/vocab/unit/L)
cL (http://qudt.org/vocab/unit/CentiL)
unit:DecaM3 (http://qudt.org/vocab/unit/DecaM3)
unit:TON_SHIPPING_US (http://qudt.org/vocab/unit/TON_SHIPPING_US)
unit:GI_UK (http://qudt.org/vocab/unit/GI_UK)
unit:GI_US (http://qudt.org/vocab/unit/GI_US)
C (http://qudt.org/vocab/unit/CORD)
```

### List applicable Units for a QuantityKind:

Which units are applicable for PressureRatio?

```java
for (String unitIri : Qudt.QuantityKinds.PressureRatio.getApplicableUnits()) {
     Unit unit = Qudt.unit(unitIri);
     System.out.println("  " + unit + " (" + unit.getIri() + ")");
}
-->
unit:MegaPA-PER-BAR (http://qudt.org/vocab/unit/MegaPA-PER-BAR)
unit:HectoPA-PER-BAR (http://qudt.org/vocab/unit/HectoPA-PER-BAR)
unit:PA-PER-BAR (http://qudt.org/vocab/unit/PA-PER-BAR)
unit:KiloPA-PER-BAR (http://qudt.org/vocab/unit/KiloPA-PER-BAR)
unit:MilliBAR-PER-BAR (http://qudt.org/vocab/unit/MilliBAR-PER-BAR)
unit:PSI-PER-PSI (http://qudt.org/vocab/unit/PSI-PER-PSI)
unit:BAR-PER-BAR (http://qudt.org/vocab/unit/BAR-PER-BAR)
```

### Instantiate unit by its label

Instantiating unit by label 'Pint (UK)':

```java
Qudt.unitFromLabel("Pint (UK)"));
-->
unit:PINT_UK
```

## Acknowledgments

This project has been developed at the [Research Studio Smart Application Technologies](https://sat.researchstudio.at) in the project ‘BIM-Interoperables Merkmalservice’, funded by the
Austrian Research Promotion Agency and Österreichische Bautechnik Veranstaltungs GmbH.

Commit message:

Add unit checks for QUDT contributions (#76)
* Add Unit.deprecated, QuantityKind.deprecated

* Enable cloning QUDT from github as an alternative

* Make factor unit comparison more robust using a relative difference comparison

* Add factor units for some units

* Improve unit analysis

* Improve calculation of conversion Multiplier

* Refactor RDF data generation and java model such that scalingof and factorunit do not clash

* Improve Qudt.convert

README.md, after:

# QUDTLib: Java Unit Conversion Library based on QUDT

Provides unit conversion and related functionality for Java.

Makes all conversions and related functionality defined by the excellent [QUDT ontology](https://qudt.org) available in a
**self-contained jar**  with **no external dependencies**. The jar containing all dependencies is **~400kB large**.

The library offers
* 1745 units, such as second, Fahrenheit, or light year
* 881 quantityKinds, such as width, pressure ratio or currency
* 29 prefixes, such as mega, kibi, or atto

...all of which the library converts if possible.

## Usage

The module clients will want to use is `io.github.qudtlib:qudtlib`. The other modules are merely needed to generate that one from either a [QUDT release zip](https://github.com/qudt/qudt-public-repo/tags) or a QUDT repository branch/tag/revision.

By default, the project uses the **release zip** configured in the project's `qudt.release.version` property.

If the environment variable `scmVersion` is set (e.g. by building with `mvn install -DscmVersion=main`), the **QUDT repository's branch** with the specified name is used.

To build from a **tag** in the QUDT repo, use e.g. `-DscmVersionType=tag -DscmVersion=v2.1.33`

To build from a **revision** in the QUDT repo use e.g. `-DscmVersionType=revision -DscmVersion=c4456d5`

Maven dependency:

```
<dependency>
	<groupId>io.github.qudtlib</groupId>
	<artifactId>qudtlib</artifactId>
	<version>${project.version}</version> <!-- remember to use the latest version -->
</dependency>
```

## API

`io.github.qudtlib.Qudt` is your friend. All functionality is accessed through static methods of that class.
You can explore the API from that starting point.

The main Model classes are:
* `Unit`: encapsulates IRI, label, [dimension vector](https://github.com/qudt/qudt-public-repo/wiki/User-Guide-for-QUDT#3-introducing-dimension-vectors-for-si-units), [multiplier/offset](https://github.com/qudt/qudt-public-repo/wiki/User-Guide-for-QUDT#4-conversion-multipliers-in-qudt), factor units (if any). Descriptions are omitted (create an issue if you want them.)
* `QuantityKind`: IRI, label, applicable units, broader quantity kinds
* `QuantityValue`: value and unit. Values are always `BigDecimal` (using `MathContext.DECIMAL128`) and there are no convenience methods allowing you
to provide other numeric types. This is intentiaonal so as not to mask any conversion problems. You'll be fine. (If you need a different `MathContext`, make an issue)

All units, quantityKinds and prefixes are avalable as constants:
* `Qudt.Units`: all units, such as `Qudt.Units.KiloM__PER__SEC`
* `Qudt.QuantityKinds:`: all quantityKinds, such as `Qudt.QuantityKinds.BloodGlucoseLevel`
* `Qudt.Prefixes`: all prefixes, such as `Qudt.Prefixes.Atto`

The functionality comprises:
* `Qudt.convert(...)`: Convert a value
* `Qudt.scaledUnit(...)`: Scale a unit (e.g., make `KiloM` from `M` and `kilo`)
* `Qudt.unscaledUnit(..)`: Unscale a unit:
* `Qudt.unit(...)`: Get Unit by IRI
* `Qudt.quantityKind(...)`: Get QuantityKind by IRI
* `Qudt.unitFromLocalName(...)`: Get Unit by local name (i.e., last part of IRI)
* `Qudt.quantityKindFromLocalName(...)`: Get QuantityKind by local name (i.e., last part of IRI)
* `Qudt.derivedUnitsFrom...(...)`: Get Units by 'factor units', e.g. find `N` for factors  `m, kg, and s^-2`. Different matching modes available for broader or narrower matching.
* `Qudt.unitFromLabel(...)`: Get Unit by label

## Examples

(see also module qudtlib-example)

### Unit conversion

Converting 38.5° Celsius into Fahrenheit:

```java
Qudt.convert(new BigDecimal("38.5"), Qudt.Units.DEG_C, Qudt.Units.DEG_F));
-->
101.3003929999999551224000000000036unit:DEG_F
```

### Find unit by factor units

Finding unit for factors: m, kg, and s^-2:

```java
Set<Unit> myUnits =
          Qudt.derivedUnitFromUnitExponentPairs(
                        Qudt.Units.M, 1,
                        Qudt.Units.KiloGM, 1,
                        Qudt.Units.SEC, -2);
-->
N
```

### Find factor units of a derived unit:

Finding factors of unit N:

```java
List<FactorUnit> myFactorUnits = Qudt.Units.N.getFactorUnits();
-->
FU{m^1}
FU{kg^1}
FU{s^-2}
```

### Scale Conversion

Converting 1N into kN:

```java
QuantityValue quantityValue = new QuantityValue(new BigDecimal("1"), Qudt.Units.N);
QuantityValue converted = Qudt.convert(quantityValue, Qudt.Units.KiloN);
-->
0.001kN
```

### List convertible units

Which units can we convert to from L?

```java
Unit fromUnit = Qudt.Units.L;
for (Unit unit : Qudt.allUnits()) {
     if (Qudt.isConvertible(fromUnit, unit)) {
          System.out.println("  " + unit + " (" + unit.getIri() + ")");
     }
}
-->
unit:GT (http://qudt.org/vocab/unit/GT)
tsp (http://qudt.org/vocab/unit/TSP)
cup (http://qudt.org/vocab/unit/CUP)
unit:YD3 (http://qudt.org/vocab/unit/YD3)
RT (http://qudt.org/vocab/unit/RT)
unit:M3 (http://qudt.org/vocab/unit/M3)
fL (http://qudt.org/vocab/unit/FemtoL)
dry_pt (http://qudt.org/vocab/unit/PINT_US_DRY)
daL (http://qudt.org/vocab/unit/DecaL)
pL (http://qudt.org/vocab/unit/PicoL)
unit:CUP_US (http://qudt.org/vocab/unit/CUP_US)
hL (http://qudt.org/vocab/unit/HectoL)
ML (http://qudt.org/vocab/unit/MegaL)
unit:BBL_US (http://qudt.org/vocab/unit/BBL_US)
st (http://qudt.org/vocab/unit/STR)
oz (http://qudt.org/vocab/unit/OZ_VOL_US)
unit:OZ_VOL_UK (http://qudt.org/vocab/unit/OZ_VOL_UK)
dL (http://qudt.org/vocab/unit/DeciL)
dry_gal (http://qudt.org/vocab/unit/GAL_US_DRY)
tbsp (http://qudt.org/vocab/unit/TBSP)
unit:Standard (http://qudt.org/vocab/unit/Standard)
nL (http://qudt.org/vocab/unit/NanoL)
unit:MilliM3 (http://qudt.org/vocab/unit/MilliM3)
gal (http://qudt.org/vocab/unit/GAL_IMP)
qt (http://qudt.org/vocab/unit/QT_US)
unit:PlanckVolume (http://qudt.org/vocab/unit/PlanckVolume)
pk (http://qudt.org/vocab/unit/PK_US_DRY)
unit:PK_UK (http://qudt.org/vocab/unit/PK_UK)
mL (http://qudt.org/vocab/unit/MilliL)
μL (http://qudt.org/vocab/unit/MicroL)
unit:DeciM3 (http://qudt.org/vocab/unit/DeciM3)
pt (http://qudt.org/vocab/unit/PINT_US)
unit:PINT_UK (http://qudt.org/vocab/unit/PINT_UK)
Bf (http://qudt.org/vocab/unit/FBM)
pi (http://qudt.org/vocab/unit/PINT)
unit:GAL_UK (http://qudt.org/vocab/unit/GAL_UK)
gal (http://qudt.org/vocab/unit/GAL_US)
bbl (http://qudt.org/vocab/unit/BBL)
unit:MicroM3 (http://qudt.org/vocab/unit/MicroM3)
ac-ft (http://qudt.org/vocab/unit/AC-FT)
unit:FT3 (http://qudt.org/vocab/unit/FT3)
unit:QT_UK (http://qudt.org/vocab/unit/QT_UK)
unit:CentiM3 (http://qudt.org/vocab/unit/CentiM3)
bui (http://qudt.org/vocab/unit/BU_UK)
bua (http://qudt.org/vocab/unit/BU_US)
unit:MI3 (http://qudt.org/vocab/unit/MI3)
unit:BBL_US_DRY (http://qudt.org/vocab/unit/BBL_US_DRY)
kL (http://qudt.org/vocab/unit/KiloL)
unit:BBL_UK_PET (http://qudt.org/vocab/unit/BBL_UK_PET)
unit:IN3 (http://qudt.org/vocab/unit/IN3)
dry_qt (http://qudt.org/vocab/unit/QT_US_DRY)
L (http://qudt.org/vocab/unit/L)
cL (http://qudt.org/vocab/unit/CentiL)
unit:DecaM3 (http://qudt.org/vocab/unit/DecaM3)
unit:TON_SHIPPING_US (http://qudt.org/vocab/unit/TON_SHIPPING_US)
unit:GI_UK (http://qudt.org/vocab/unit/GI_UK)
unit:GI_US (http://qudt.org/vocab/unit/GI_US)
C (http://qudt.org/vocab/unit/CORD)
```

### List applicable Units for a QuantityKind:

Which units are applicable for PressureRatio?

```java
for (String unitIri : Qudt.QuantityKinds.PressureRatio.getApplicableUnits()) {
     Unit unit = Qudt.unit(unitIri);
     System.out.println("  " + unit + " (" + unit.getIri() + ")");
}
-->
unit:MegaPA-PER-BAR (http://qudt.org/vocab/unit/MegaPA-PER-BAR)
unit:HectoPA-PER-BAR (http://qudt.org/vocab/unit/HectoPA-PER-BAR)
unit:PA-PER-BAR (http://qudt.org/vocab/unit/PA-PER-BAR)
unit:KiloPA-PER-BAR (http://qudt.org/vocab/unit/KiloPA-PER-BAR)
unit:MilliBAR-PER-BAR (http://qudt.org/vocab/unit/MilliBAR-PER-BAR)
unit:PSI-PER-PSI (http://qudt.org/vocab/unit/PSI-PER-PSI)
unit:BAR-PER-BAR (http://qudt.org/vocab/unit/BAR-PER-BAR)
```

### Instantiate unit by its label

Instantiating unit by label 'Pint (UK)':

```java
Qudt.unitFromLabel("Pint (UK)"));
-->
unit:PINT_UK
```

## Acknowledgments

This project has been developed at the [Research Studio Smart Application Technologies](https://sat.researchstudio.at) in the project ‘BIM-Interoperables Merkmalservice’, funded by the
Austrian Research Promotion Agency and Österreichische Bautechnik Veranstaltungs GmbH.
